# dunphy_yen_papin_supplement
All supplemental code and data from Dunphy et al (currently under review)
biorxiv version applies to commit 8d1eb3e0f8786552ee8ffd3517922d470db3c5a5 and earlier

S1A (previously S1) Code - MATLAB sample code to calculate growth dynamics

S1B (previously S2) Code - R code and data to regenerate paper figures

S1C (previously S3) Code - MATLAB code to perform gene essentiality predictions


README Information (From S1 Text)

S1A Code. MATLAB sample code to calculate growth dynamics

Software information:
 MATLAB R2016b

Installation:

o	Obtain a MATLAB license from https://www.mathworks.com/

o	Install the appropriate version of MATLAB for your operating system and activate your license.

o	Download the S1A Code zip folder into your MATLAB folder or another known location and unzip it. 

Scripts:

o	S1_Code_Implementation.m – Run this script to calculate and plot the growth dynamics of the 20 carbon sources supporting growth of all five lineages (plots each biological replicate separately). To avoid plotting all 300 growth curves, comment out line 23.

o	calcGrowthDynamics.m – Function called by S1_Code_Implementation.m. This script contains the algorithm for calculating the growth rate and time to mid-exponential for each growth curve. 

Data files: 

o	S1_RawData.mat – This is a .mat file containing the data needed from S1_RawData.csv needed to calculate growth dynamics. 

o	S1_RawData.csv – All raw growth data for three replicates of five lineages on the 20 carbon sources in Fig 5. Note that the data in the main text are all averaged across the three replicates. 

Instructions:

o	Open MATLAB and change your path to the S1 Code folder (or folder where you have the above scripts and data files stored).

o	Run S1_Code_Implementation.m to calculate growth dynamics from the manuscript. (Keep in mind that the values reported in Fig 5 and S3 Data are the averages of what this script generates)

o	To calculate growth dynamics of your own growth curve data, you can write your own script that uses the provided function calcGrowthDynamics. 


S1B Code. R code and data to regenerate figures

Software information:
R Version 3.4.0

Installation: 
o	Download RStudio (open source license) from https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/ 

o	Create a new project in the S1 Data folder by opening RStudio, selecting File->New Project… -> New Directory -> Empty Project. Enter a directory name (can be anything you want), and choose S1 Data as the subdirectory. Make sure that the project is in the S1 Data folder and not in a subfolder. 
 
Required R packages:

Once RStudio is running, the following packages need to be installed in order for the supplied script to be able to run: 

o	readr

o	dplyr

o	ggplot2

o	ggthemes

o	tidyr

o	viridis

o	gridExtra

o	grid

o	knitr

o	reshape2

o	gplots

o	RColorBrewer 

o	ggsignif

o	cowplot

o	ggpubr

o	gtable

o	png 

All available using install.packages(‘packageName’), or the first chunk of code in allFigures.Rmd can be uncommented the first time the file is run. 

Scripts:

o	allFigures.Rmd

Data files: 

o	biologDataPM1.csv – All growth data on Phenotypic Microarray Plate PM1

o	biologDataPM2.csv – All growth data on Phenotypic Microarray Plate PM2a

o	headersPM1.csv – Carbon source labels from plate PM1

o	headersPM2.csv – Carbon source labels from plate PM2a

o	biologGrowthDynamics.csv – All calculated growth dynamics

o	growthDataNAG.csv – Growth data from Figure 4 (previously growthDataGlcNAc.csv)

o	mutationsPIP.csv – Mutated genes in the piperacillin-evolved lineage

o	geneEssentialityPredictions.csv – Predicted essential genes by carbon source

o	growthDataLeucine.csv – Growth data of ancestor, PIP, and gnyA on 40mM L-Leucine (all 4 biological replicates)

o	growthData4HBA_1.csv – Half of the growth data on 4HBA

o	growthData4HBA_2.csv – The other half of the growth data on 4HBA

o	growthDataIsoleucine_gnyA.csv – Growth data from S6 Fig.

o	growthDataGlcNAc_supplementalLineages.csv – Growth data from S3 Fig. 

o	growthDataGlcNAc_CCCP.csv – Growth data from S4 Fig.

o	growthDataHocquet_1.csv – Growth data from Fig 7. 

o	growthDataHocquet_1csv – Growth data from Fig 7. 

o	Figures and Data folder – Empty folder where figures/data generated by the script will be saved

Instructions: 

o	Prior to this point, RStudio must be installed with the appropriate packages and a new project must be created in the S1 Data folder.

o	Open the project in the S1 Data folder.

o	Open the script allFigures.Rmd in the project (File -> Open File…).

o	Run the script by clicking Knit->Knit to HTML in the upper left-hand corner of the window. 

o	This will generate the following:

  •	An HTML file containing all of the figures and figure captions
  
  •	Figures 2-7 from the main manuscript as .pdf files
  
  •	Figures S1-S9 excluding S7 as .pdf files 
  
  •	Data S1-S4 as .csv files

Figures can easily be changed to different file formats (e.g. jpg, png, etc.) or saved to different locations by changing adjusting the filenames and paths within ggsave functions. A call to ggsave can be found at the bottom of the code for each figure. 

S1C Code. MATLAB code to perform gene essentiality predictions.

Software information:
 MATLAB R2016b,
Gurobi 6.5.2

Required Toolboxes and Software:
In order to implement the included code, you will first need to download the following:

o	Gurobi Optimizer – Can be downloaded from: http://www.gurobi.com after acquiring a license. Licenses are free for academic use.  

o	Cobra Toolbox – Can be downloaded from: https://github.com/opencobra/cobratoolbox/

o	Check that your solver and toolbox are installed correctly with the following commands:

•	initCobraToolbox (this command initializes the toolbox)

•	changeCobraSolver(‘solvername’) (where solver name is ‘gurobi5’ or ‘gurobi6’)

•	testAll (note that not all tests will pass with the gurobi solver)

Scripts:

o	S3_Code_Implementation.m – Main script to generate S4 Data

o	changeMinimalMedia.m – Function to set the model to minimal media

o	addExchangeReaction_JB.m – Function to add an exchange reaction 

** Functions were not originally written by Dunphy et al. Author contributions are listed within the scripts. 


Data files: 

o	model_PA.mat- This workspace contains the model iPau1129 (Bartell, Blazier et al., 2017). The model can also be downloaded from: 
http://bme.virginia.edu/csbl/Downloads1.html 


Instructions:

o	Open MATLAB and change your path to the S1C Code folder (or folder where you have the above scripts and data files stored).

o	Add the Cobra Toolbox folder and subfolders to your path. 

o	If you are using a Windows machine, add the gurobi folder and subfolders to your path.

o	Open S3_Code_Implementation.m and run it. This will take some time. The script will output a CSV file named geneEssentialityPredictions.csv, which is identical the file of the same name in S2 Code. The output is an unfiltered version of S4 Data. 
